I'm Desiree and this is my husband
Jordan for the past five years we've
been exploring the Caribbean on a budget
aboard our 30-foot sailboat atticus our
lifestyle isn't glamorous and our boat
is far from perfect but we've been
successfully turning our dream into a
reality without a lot of money
[Music]
in this video we'll be diving into the
systems of our off-grid sailboat and the
highs and lows of our lifestyle
[Music]
previously on Project advocates after
spending three years refitting or
fixer-upper sailboat we left the United
States with only $2,000 and the goal of
working while we cruised
we made it as far as Isla Mujeres Mexico
before he ran out of money and had to
find work for the next year needed
freelance boat repair jobs until he
saved up enough cash to cast the lines
in sail south to explore the Western
Caribbean
[Music]
hey guys and welcome aboard Atticus this
is our 57 year old fiberglass sailboat
which is keeping us afloat and letting
us played a pretty adventurous life a
kiss is an allied c-130 built in 1963
this model was the first fiberglass
sailboat to successfully sail around the
world she's a really heavy really strong
but small sail though she is actually a
almost purpose-built to be able to
explore the far reaches of the globe and
to do it relatively safely
to appear at the bow we've got the
tanker station so this is where we've
got everything having to do with our
anchor setup we've got a relatively
large anchor it's a 45 pound mantas
we've also got this quarter-inch
high-test steel chain so to retrieve our
anchor we use our manual windlass it
basically makes it so that bringing all
of this pain in and bringing the anchor
up can be done with relatively little
effort even in really strong winds so
let out the chain we can just release
the brake and then that lets the chain
out so this is a mantas bridle it's made
out of a half inch three strand nylon
line that connects to the chain itself
basically whenever we get you know
really tight pulls on the anchor the
snubber uses nylon lines so that it can
stretch really good and the chain
doesn't get that shock loading that
could actually break some of this gear
and here we've got our forward wind
scoop / sunshade / rain tent this thing
is amazing it's not very common you
won't see a lot of things just like this
on other boats but we love it because
first of all it really does push a lot
of air down into the forward hatch and
through the rest of the boat and so it
does a great job of kind of helping to
maintain the temperature down below even
if we're in the tropics the other thing
it does is you can see it provides shade
over a little bit of the fore deck but
in particular over the forward hatch
because if Sun is going directly in
there then it can really heat up the
inside of the boat and then finally it
keeps the rain out of the forward hatch
when it's in this mode it's you know
okay keeping the rain out but when we
lower it down into its second position
sort of rain position there's
essentially no way that rain can get
into the forward hatch and we've got a
couple other elements to the boat that
are really important for ventilation one
are these Cal vents with the door aid
boxes below and they basically just
funnel air down into the boat but these
door aid boxes make sure that the air
can get in but none of the water can get
in then also our hardtop or Dodger here
is actually really important for
ventilation as well the hardtop serves a
similar function as the forward wind
scoop slash rain tent in that it allows
us to always have our companionway open
so if it's raining the rain doesn't get
in here if it's really sunny the Sun
doesn't get in here it also actually
creates a negative pressure for the
airflow so whereas the wind scoop
forward funnels air into the boat the
hardtop actually sucks air out of the
boat contributing to the amount of air
that actually flows through maintaining
that airflow
all the time is just so essential for us
because in the tropics it would just get
so stifling down below if we weren't
able to have constant air moving we've
also got these 12-volt fans and they
just do an amazing job for how small
they are and for how little electricity
that they use and then finally we've got
these opening portholes which are
basically just windows that open up let
a little bit of Breeze in and we have
four of these around the boat
so when we bought Atticus we were
specifically looking for a boat that was
really affordable we didn't have a lot
of money and then we also really wanted
a boat that we could maintain well like
keep it in really good shape for very
little money because our intention our
goal was to work while we sailed you
know I was doing fiberglass work Desiree
was doing canvas work for other cruisers
and so our intention was to do that kind
of work for half the year and make
enough money to be able to support
ourselves for the entire year and if
you're gonna do that kind of work and
only do it for half the year you've got
to really keep your expenses exceedingly
low bigger boats are more expensive to
maintain smaller boats are cheaper to
maintain and so we kind of wanted to get
a boat that would cost very little
upfront and then cost very little to
keep in great condition
[Music]
living on Atticus in the tropics we are
really really vulnerable to the Sun it
is super strong it gets us really hot
it's really easy to get burnt the boat
heats up and we've met a lot of cruisers
who spent their whole life sailing to
beautiful places but they always tell us
the one thing that they wish that they
did differently was to really protect
their skin and a lot of them are
struggling with skin cancers and skin
problems so one thing we do to combat
the Sun on Atticus is just we make sure
we're always covered up and then beyond
that we actually made this huge sunshade
to basically just cover as much of the
boat as possible it has curtains which
we can drop down and that's really nice
because we can have ventilation on one
side of the boat and a really awesome
view but on the side of the boat that's
really exposed to the Sun we're
protected with that additional shade
from the curtains it takes us about 20
to 30 minutes to set this bad boy up so
we really only set it up temporarily
when we know we're gonna be at an
anchorage for more than a week or so but
when we're moving a lot hopping from
Anchorage to Anchorage or under sail
this has to come down I know a really
important system for living off-grid is
managing our freshwater on Atticus we
can store 30 gallons of freshwater in
our internal tanks down below and then
we've also got three 5-gallon Gerry jugs
and one five gallon inflatable shower on
deck so that's a total of 50 gallons of
freshwater that we can stow on Atticus
so if we're being conservative we could
stay off-grid for about two weeks but if
it rains enough we can use our water
collection to kind of extend that
indefinitely generally to get fresh
water what we do is well load up our
jerrycans
into our dinghy and then we'll head to
the closest town and kind of look for a
spigot that's on the water whether it be
a marina or a fishing dock or a fuel
dock or a restaurant so we go in ask for
fresh water sometimes they charge for it
sometimes they give it to us for free
but either way we always make sure
that we filter our water with this
filtering system so to filter out the
kind of big nasty particles we use a
string filter here and then we've got a
point five micron carbon filter here to
hopefully get rid of most of the
bacteria and smaller particles now this
filtration system isn't completely
bulletproof so when we get back to the
boat we'll go ahead and put in a small
amount of bleach into each of these
containers before adding the water back
into our internal storage tanks
sometimes though we get to a town where
the water is not suitable for drinking
so in that case we just buy five gallon
water jugs which most of the locals use
also and in that case we'll use the
municipal water for doing dishes and
showering the old reserve our drinking
water for that purified water only one
of my favorite systems on atticus is our
water collection system so this is just
a little through-hole basically a hole
that we cut through our canvas and a
little fitting to attach a hose there's
a little bit of tensioning here so that
the water pools right here and so we're
able to collect water directly into our
jerry jugs or our primary water tanks
and basically in about a twenty minute
rain shower we can collect about five
gallons of water which is pretty awesome
for people like us who can really extend
five gallons for a couple of days
between the two of us and then if we get
like a full-on downpour for a whole day
that means we're resetting the clock and
we can have up to two extra weeks out
here enjoying being off-grid and as far
as laundry we've found that doing it by
hand on atticus just takes way too much
time and water and a lot of the places
that we've been cruising in it's really
affordable to just take our laundry
ashore drop it off and get it picked up
a couple of days later so that's what we
do with our laundry we actually don't
have an indoor shower on atticus so we
take all of our showers out here and at
first moving aboard it felt a little bit
weird but now I kind of like the view
and
it's an excuse to cool off and hop in
the water a lot this right here is our
shower and it holds I think five gallons
of water and I'm actually not going to
use very much of it so what I do instead
is use all this water that we have
around us to kind of supplement my
cleaning process so the first thing I do
is hop in feels really good then I use
my one of my favorite things on board
which is this collapsible bucket get
some extra salt water and just do you
like you doing a normal shower
except I'm sitting and I get to watch
the world kind of pass by say hello to
neighbors wardrobe malfunction last step
it's finally using our fresh water and
our helios shower when we're super super
remote and we need to really monitor how
much water we're using every single day
we can switch to actual liter bottles of
water with like a little squirt top and
we each get one liter of water per
person per day showering on a small boat
using this system is pretty inconvenient
but it does feel amazing and the view is
awesome and it kind of wakes me up it
makes me realize where we are a lot of
the time in the end it is an enjoyable
process but it does take time
[Music]
one way that we can serve freshwater on
board is by using salt water when we do
the dishes this faucet is for salt water
and this one is for freshwater and we
use these manual foot pumps to control
the flow so I'll basically just rinse
off the plate with salt water soap it up
with salt water then I'll rinse with
salt water and then I'll do one final
pass with fresh water now if we're
really trying to conserve our fresh
water I'll either use this squirt bottle
to rinse off the salt on the dishes or
we'll actually not use fresh water at
all wash and rinse everything with salt
water and then leave them on deck to dry
and then bring them back in and with a
cloth we'll just kind of wipe off the
salt and surprisingly they see pretty
clean the biggest thing we have to worry
about is the rag which gets kind of
nasty after about a week we just replace
it and save a lot of water
[Music]
obviously it'd be a lot more comfortable
to cruise on a bigger boat with fully
fleshed-out systems where we could stay
off-grid for months at a time this is
our way of having that off-grid
experience on a very small scale on a
boat that we can afford at the end of
the day we're having the same core
experiences that we're walking on those
same deserted beaches we're getting to
do those same hikes we're snorkeling and
spearfishing in the same places and
getting to meet the same kind of
cultures and people it's sort of like
the perfect is the enemy of the good
if we were to wait until we had enough
money to buy a bigger boat with more
expensive systems
it might just never happen you know we
might get caught up with life and I
think that happens with a lot of people
and so we kind of made that choice to do
have this experience now while we knew
we could
[Music]
the only thing we have to think about
while we're off-grid is where to put
over food this right here is our 12-volt
angle fridge and it is super efficient
it draws about two amps and it's only
running about half the day which is
awesome we also like that it's a
drop-down fridge so it might look really
small and it is but you can actually fit
way more than you might think in here
just because we pile in all the food
right on top of each other and there's
not a single inch of space in here that
isn't used and the drop down style is
also nice because when we do open it not
a lot of that cold air actually escapes
from the rest of the refrigerator this
whole area stays really nice and cool
and that's actually where we keep all of
our meats the most annoying thing about
it is if I need something at the bottom
of the refrigerator I basically have to
unpack everything and then put
everything back in so it's kind of like
playing Tetris every day and as for our
dry good storage this is where I kind of
keep most of our greens and rice and
beans that we use on a daily basis and
how to kiss has these really kind of
weird-looking storage mix they look
really small but you can actually fit a
lot back there so we've got pasta right
s'more beans
moving over here is where we keep our
canned goods when we first moved aboard
I was really kind of hesitant and
nervous about cooking with canned goods
but I've gotten better at integrating
them into our meals while we're off-grid
to make it still taste fresh and light
and tasty and then finally we've got our
unrefrigerated fruits and vegetables and
when I first moved on atticus I had to
learn a lot about what absolutely needs
to be refrigerated and what doesn't and
I've been really pleasantly surprised
about some some things that last for a
long time like cabbage for example can
last up to a month it gets a little
wilty but you can still eat it and this
is a really cool spot because I get a
lot of ventilation so that's really
great for keeping these onions for
example it makes them last a long time
our last little nook where I keep our
fresh fruits
vegetables is over here and this is a
really cool spot because I get a decent
amount of ventilation with these
compartments but I also use this piece
of Sunbrella to protect these fruits
from the Sun because I really want to
keep the Sun off of these fruits and
vegetables and I also like to make sure
that I sanitize all of my fruits and
vegetables the day that I get them as
well as Reese Anna ties all of my
compartments every single time I go and
get new provisions and this way you're
not getting any kind of bacterial growth
back there and they last a really long
time so we found that some vegetables
last you know a couple of weeks or so
but then there are others that lasts a
lot longer like onions and potatoes and
so when we're off-grid we'll kind of eat
the vegetables that go quickly first and
then we'll slowly transition into eating
those vegetables that lasts longer and
trying to mix those with their canned
goods to keep it fresh I should mention
that we do a lot of spearfishing when
we're off-grid so that we can supplement
all the food that we have on board this
is our two burner propane stove and as
you can see it's gimballed which is
really nice we've got a stainless steel
kettle which we use with our French
press to make coffee in the morning
we've also got about five pots and pans
that we use for all of our cooking needs
starting with our cast iron which we
really love because we don't have room
on board for a barbecue but the cast
iron gets that nice kind of barbecue
blackened flavor which I really like is
our two stainless steel nesting pans and
then just put the handle on either one
of those pots and there we go also got
this omneya stovetop oven it's a little
bit worse for wear
got a couple holes in it and it's kind
of falling apart but this is what we use
to make brownies or any baked goods
where and just have a little bit of a
sweet tooth the last pot that we use
which is one of my favorites is our
pressure cooker and it's a stovetop
pressure cooker which is really nice so
it doesn't take any electricity and yeah
between all of these pots and pans we
can eat like royalty on Atticus
[Music]
we generate all of the electricity that
we use on Atticus we have 400 watts of
solar for 100 watt panels two of which
are semi flexible panels and are located
on top of our Sun Shade and those can be
moved to the top of our heart top when
we are sailing and don't have the Sun
shada we also have two rigid solar
panels and those extend off either side
of the cockpit we also have a wind
generator which really comes in handy on
cloudy but windy days and then finally
we have a 40 amp alternator on our
primary diesel engine the solar panels
by themselves pretty much generate all
the electricity that we need and
whenever they don't the wind generator
typically picks up the bill we've also
got a battery monitor so that we can
keep tabs on how topped up the batteries
are now the whole system runs on 12
volts DC but we do have an inverter
which pumps that up to 110 AC and we use
that mostly to charge our laptops as
well as to run some low draw power tools
now the key to being able to sustainably
generate all of the electricity that we
need is keeping our electricity
consumption low and we're able to do
that with things like using foot pumps
for our pressure water system by having
all LED lights throughout the boat and
foregoing some luxuries like air
conditioning and hot water now the
largest demands on our electrical system
are the refrigerator as well as charging
our laptops through the inverter and
then just charging various devices and
camera batteries with power USB charging
stations now one really cool thing about
modern technology is we're able to watch
movies on our tablet listen to music on
Bluetooth speakers all with a very small
amount of electrical usage
[Music]
moving on to Atticus has really taught
me a lot about what it truly means to be
self-sufficient I recognize that in the
past I've really taken civilization for
granted and just the access to groceries
water for pain all these things that you
don't think about maybe when you're on
land when you're on a boat floating in
the middle of nowhere and you've just
got it and your partner to rely on you
really start to appreciate the gravity
of planning out all those systems you
just don't have any other options beyond
resolve the situation yourself your
hands and your brain yeah it's no matter
what the situation is I mean you could
be dragging anchor towards a reef in the
middle of a 50 knot squall you know if
your sink stops working it seems really
silly but you either need to fix that
sink or do without any form of running
water you could have your engine die on
you and out in the middle of nowhere you
know you could have a medical situation
that you have to handle and there's
absolutely no help on the way
we've probably got the same amount of
tools as a medium-sized workshop and
they're just all stowed away and hidden
in random places on the boat and this is
just one example of an area where I
stowaway as many tools as I possibly can
another thing we have to manage while
living off-grid is waste so this is our
toilet or our head as sailors call it
you can't really see the actual toilet
because it's a really small little
bathroom and we've got stuff everywhere
again living on a 30-foot boat we really
have to take advantage of all surfaces
so it's a really simple manual pump
toilet and it takes saltwater so you can
use that to flush everything out and
then we don't put anything except
organic material in our head the toilet
paper we just put in our trash can and
then we try to empty that as often as
possible so with our system we're able
to pump our waste into a holding tank
which is located in that room underneath
the V berth or directly overboard and as
far as our trash will go ashore and try
to find a place where we can throw away
our trash depending on where we are it
can be a little bit challenging but for
the most part we can find a restaurant
or a public dumpster somewhere the real
trick is managing our trash when we're
gonna be really far away from
civilization for long stretches of time
and in those situations we actually
throw our organic waste overboard and
then we make sure that everything that
goes into the trash is really clean so
we'll rinse out our cans and bottles
with saltwater and then try to use our
zip locks and plastics over and over
again as much as possible
[Music]
now let's talk about how we handle
communications and staying connected
while we are off-grid primarily what we
do is anymore we use our smart phones
our cell phones
we've been blown away by how prolific
accesses to 3G and 4G throughout the
Western and Southern Caribbean so most
of the time we're actually so most of
the time were actually and in fact the
Internet's generally pretty fast so
that's become our primary mode of
uploading videos for YouTube is using
our cellular data now there's times when
we're pretty darn far away from a town
so our phones are just getting maybe one
bar of signal if that's the case then
we've started using a cellular booster
we've been using the weboost drive and
this thing is awesome if we've got one
bar and just barely any signal
whatsoever this thing will basically
give us full signal now there's also
times where we're so remote that we
don't even get a cellular signal using
our booster and in those situations we
use satellite communication what we've
done in the past is used a Delorme in
reach and this thing is pretty cool it
allows us to send text messages to
phones or through email and we can also
get very rudimentary weather information
with it but more recently we have
upgraded to the iridium GO and this
allows us to download very very high
quality weather information through
predict wind as well as make phone calls
over the satellite network and actually
just access the Internet more generally
using our smart phone we've also got an
SSB radio receiver which we can use to
receive weather fax images as well as to
listen to distant broadcasts of weather
information and we've got a VHF radio
which we mostly use for nearby boat to
boat communication as well as for
talking to officials ashore when
checking in or checking out of a country
so now let's talk about how we get
around how
move the boat obviously Atticus is a
sailboat so we sail to get places we
also have an inboard diesel engine it's
a 25 horsepower beta marine and we have
a 40 gallon fuel tank as well as a 5
gallon jerrican full of diesel so total
we have 45 gallons of diesel which
theoretically can get us 450 miles if we
needed to but we really don't motor long
distances we prefer to sail long
distances so we basically use the motor
for short hops and for motoring when
there just isn't any wind now once we
anchor somewhere we mostly just use
Atticus as a home base and then we zip
around and explore using our dinghy
which we affectionately call little shit
now the little shit is an 8 foot zodiac
rib and we also have a 8 horsepower
Tohatsu outboard what we love about
going off grid is getting to explore
getting to go spearfishing getting to
snorkel and most of those things involve
moving quickly with gear in a dinghy but
we also use our dinghy as a workhorse so
it's how we transfer materials to the
boat when we're doing a project or
that's how we ferry water to the boat or
how we bring groceries back from town
now everywhere in the world outboard
engines are vulnerable to theft so what
we do every single night before we go to
bed is we raise the outboard onto the
boat and then we suspend the dinghy off
the water just to make sure that we
don't get growth accruing on the bottom
[Music]
for all the difficulties of living on a
sailboat off-grid there's so much to
love about sometimes I just have to
pinch myself when I walk up on deck
early in the morning as the sun's rising
it's almost like I wake up in a national
park
you know just smack dab in the middle of
it but instead of popping my head out of
a tent or you know out of some sort of
expensive hotel it's our home so that
experience of being a part of nature
being in a situation that so few people
get the opportunity to experience and
then you meld that with sort of the the
self-sufficient nature of what it takes
to be there and you you get into this
sort of mindset of being a part of the
world you know and taking your life into
your own hands and reaping these huge
rewards on a daily basis and scaring the
living heck out of yourself regularly
and so you definitely feel very alive
[Music]
all right oh hey guys hope you enjoyed
this week's episode if you haven't yet
make sure you subscribe to our channel
by clicking here and if you're already a
huge fan of project Atticus consider
becoming a patron right there see you
next week